GUIDELINES    
FOR  RESEARCH  PROJECTS OF  
MINISTRY OF COAL  
  
FEBRUARY  2021 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA  
MINISTRY OF COAL  
SHASTRI BHAWAN  
NEW DELHI – 110 001   
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA  
MINISTRY OF COAL  
 
 267310/2021/CCT1782 
1 
 GUIDELINES FOR S&T PROGRAMME  
 
The Ministry of Coal  (MoC) , Government of India, has been supporting R&D programme in coal and lignite 
sector since 1976.   
 
The Ministry normally supports projects of shorter duration ( preferably 1 to 2 years), the findings of which, if 
completed successfully, can be used directly for commercial exploitation and benefit to the industry. 
However, in exceptional cases, research in newly emerging and front line areas of Science & Engineering 
and projec ts having long terms implications are also supported.   
These guidelines stress es upon the priority of Ministry to the ambitious plans of the GOI on Atmanirbhar 
Bharat  and Make in India projects in line with the identified thrust areas.  
 
The guidelines for implementation of the projects have been issued from time to time, since 1976. These 
guidelines have been revised by the Ministry and its Standing Scientific Research Committee to make it 
comprehensive and in line with latest development .  
 
It will help the implementing agencies in formulating the research proposals in an organized manner and 
facilitate evaluation and monitoring of research projects.  
  267310/2021/CCT1783 
2 
 1.0 R&D SET UP in Ministry of Coal ( MoC ) 
 
A. Standing Scientific Research Committee ( SSRC )  
Standing Scientific Research Committee (SSRC) of the Ministry of Coal under the Ch airmanship of 
Secretary (Coal) is the Apex body to plan, programme, budget and oversee the implementation of 
research projects and provide financial support for all activiti es related to Research and Development 
project . It has members from statutory  bodies, industry, research institution & other ministries. The SSRC  
may co -opt any other members whenever deemed necessary from the renowned research Institutes / 
experts from CI L and other organizations.  
Delegation of Power (DOP) : 
a) To approve  S&T Project on the recommendation of Technical Sub -committee of SSRC  
b) To approve extension of p roject duration of the ongoing S&T projects , if required.  
c) To approve Cost Escalation of S&T Projects  
d) Monitoring of on-going S&T projects  
e) Termination of S&T projects on recommendation of the Technical Sub -committee of SSRC  
f) To perform such other work as may be necessary, from time  to time, in regard to the furtherance of 
R&D activities in coal sector  
The committee may meet as often as necessary, but at least once  in a year.  At least 50% of the 
committee members including Chairman of the committee, must be present for successfully conducting 
any meeting.  
B. Technical Sub-committee of SSRC  
For evaluating the need of  research work and implementation, SSRC  has constituted a  Technical Sub -
committee of SSRC  under the chairmanship of HoD(Mining), IIT -BHU / IIT -KGP/ IIT -ISM on annual 
rotation basis. Ministry of Coal may recon stitute the committee as and when required.   
Delegation of Power : 
a) To recommend  new S&T proposal  for consideration of SSRC . 
b) To approve extension of project s duration  up to 6 months . 
c) To approve Re -appropriation of funds from one item to another in the same head i.e. Capital to 
Capital and Revenue to revenue, within the approved project cost.  
d) To recommend  Cost Escalation of the projects for consideration of SSRC  
e) Monitoring of on -going S &T projects  
f) To approve any change in specifications of equipment, change in implementing agency, scope of 
work and the methodologies etc.  without altering the approved objective(s) of the project  and without 
additional cost  
g) Acceptance of completion report s of S&T projects, with information to SSRC  267310/2021/CCT1784 
3 
 h) To recommend t ermination of S&T projects  at any stage  if significant progress  was not made due to 
any reason  and / or fund has not been properly utilized  
The committee may meet as often as necessary, but at least twice  in a year. At least 50% of the 
committee members including Chairman of the committee, must be present for successfully conducting 
any meeting.  
Delegation of Power to Chairman of the Technical  Sub-committee of SSRC  
a) To approve extension of project duration up to 03 (Three ) months beyond the original schedule  to 
avoid delay in implementation of the project  
b) To approve increase in cost solely due to variation in exchange rate & Govt. taxes (GST etc.) which 
should be subsequently ratified by SSRC.  
c) One-time approval of  Re-appropriation of funds from one item to another in the same head i.e. 
Capital to Capital and Revenue to revenue, within the approved project cost 
2.0 NODAL AGENCY   
 
Central Mine Planning and Design Institute, Ranchi, a Mini Ratna Subsidiary Company of Coal India 
Limited is the Nodal Agency for coordinating and monitoring of S&T projects of MoC . The job of co -
ordination involves inviting new research project proposals,  carrying out first level scrutiny, placing the 
proposals for consideration of Technical Sub -Committee of SSRC  and SSRC , monitor the progress of 
the on-going projects at regular intervals, preparation of S&T Budget Estimates / Revised Estimates , 
disburse ment  of funds  to the implementing agencies based on the progress of the project , dissemination 
of research findings and provide assistance to the nodal officers of the concerned subsidiary/company 
for promoting their replication  in field operations.  
The project proposals, if required, may be sent for expert opinion within CMPDI and outside  for their 
opinion on scientific and technical merits of the projects . Nodal Agency may interact with Principal 
Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) regarding a ny clarification or modification in the project 
proposal. If necessary, Nodal agency may call for / visit the institute/organization and discuss with Project 
leader / Coordinator regarding project proposal. After 1st level scrutiny, Nodal agency will send the Soft 
copies of all project proposal  (with comments received from experts) , which conforms to S&T Guidelines, 
to all the members of the Technical Sub -Committee of SSRC for their views , as the projects shall be 
deliberated in the  meeting of Technical sub -committee of SSRC.  
The Nodal Agency, will keep MoC  informed of the commencement and progress  of the approved S&T 
projects  and provide Agenda papers to Member Secretary  for arranging meetings of the Technical Sub -
Committee of SSRC  and SSRC  and provide draf t minutes of the meeting to the Member secretary of the 
committee(s) .   
 
 
 267310/2021/CCT1785 
4 
  
3.0 INVITING RESEARCH PROPOSALS  
The Nodal Ag ency shall give wide publicity of S&T Programme of MoC  and the identified thrust areas  
through websites/email etc.  and invite proposals from Govt./ Reputed Private Research and Educational 
Institutions, Organisations, Public Sector Undertakings and from such othe r agencies which have 
capabilities  to take up R&D work  in India and abroad .  Nodal Agency may float Express ion of Interest 
(EoI) on identified thrust areas for inviting project proposal s as per the norms framed and approved by 
the chairman of the Technical Sub -committee for SSRC . 
In case of multi institutional projects, the principal Implementing Agency shall o btain formal 
agreement/consent from the collaborating /sub agencies  
a) CIL subsidiaries, SCCL, NLCIL,  Govt. Research & Academic Institutions / Organisations can act as 
Principal Implementing or Sub -implementing Agency(s) in the project.  
b) Reputed Research Organisations / Academic Institutes in Public & private sector 
(affiliated /recognised  by M inistry of Education  / DST  or any Govt. Body ) from India, who have past 
track records and expertise may participate in the research project s alone or  along with  any Govt. 
Research & Academic Institutions / Organisations and/or any subsidiary  of CIL , SCCL, NLCIL . 
Organisation / institute from abroad may participate in the project along  with Indian Govt. agencies. 
In above case of multi -institutional projects, the Principal Implementing Agency will enter into a 
formal agreement with all the Sub-implementing agency(s).  
c) To encourage participation of individual /group of  researchers / students  namely IDD, B. Tech, 
M.Tech. and Ph.D. students  in R&D initiative, a detailed guidelines are enclosed as Annexure -II. 
All such student projects must have at least one regular faculty as P.I. for guidance, monitoring the 
project and purchase activities, as per the purchase rules  of the concerned institute . Also, the UC, 
SC and liquidation are important in such projects, which can be taken care through a well-designed  
system. Further, the student submitting the projects should have at least term of the project period 
remaining in the Institute.  If the student passed out f rom the institute and leave the institute for any 
other assignment, it is the responsibility of the project guide to find alternative student to complete 
the project within the approved project schedule. The funds shall be disbursed through the 
institution/organization concerned.   
d) For any new institute/organization submitting project proposal, if required, a committee consisting 
of Chairman of the Technical Sub -committee or his nominated representative along with 
representative from MoC and repre sentative from CMPDI may visit the institute/organization before 
taking up any project and submit the report before Technical Sub -committee during deliberation of 
the proposal. Decision of Technical Sub -committee of SSRC in this regard will be treated as f inal.  
e) Generally, it is the responsibility of the PI to complete the project on behalf of institute/organisation. 
However, i n exceptional cases, the change of the host institute on account of PI moving from one 
host institute to another host institute will  be considered in MoC subject to the present host institute 
giving its no objection certificate and the prospective institute agreeing to the terms and conditions 
of sanctioning of the grant. In such cases, the equipment etc. and the balance of funds will be 267310/2021/CCT1786 
5 
 transferred from the present institute to the proposed institute.  Decision of Technical Sub -committee 
of SSRC in this regard will be treated as final.  
4.0 THRUST AREAS OF RESEARCH PROJECTS  
Thrust areas for future research in coal sector have been identified  and displayed in the MoC & CMPDI  
website  (https://scienceandtech.cmpdi.co.in/ ) . Thrust areas  are broadly categorised as following:  
 Advanced technology/methodology for improvement of production &  productivity from underground 
mining and open cast Mining  
 Improvement of safety, health and environment  
 Waste to Wealth  
 Alternative use of coal and clean coal technologies  
 Coal beneficiation and utilization  
 Exploration  
 Innovation and indigenization (Under Make -in-India Concept)  
Projects can be undertaken in any other areas which can be beneficial to coal industries.  Inter-, multi - 
and trans - disciplinary projects must be encouraged.  
Any technology which is beneficial for coal industry and being used successfully outside the country, may 
be taken up under S&T project in India with input of indeginisation and Make in India concept  to suit 
Indian working conditions . The same will be applicable for indeginious development of any 
equipment/system which is being used successfully elsewhere in the world.  
5.0 PROJECT PROPOSAL  
The S&T proposal should be framed as per the prescribed Proforma ( Form -I). In view of rapid  evolution 
in technology, the projects duration may be limited to  2 years. However, in exceptional situations the 
extensions may be granted in 2 phases, each being 6 - months only so that the total duration does not 
exceed 3 years for exceptional cases.  The methodology of filling in the Proforma and othe r details are 
given at Annexure –I with the following details:  
 The project submission proforma should be concise with word limitations in each item  as provided 
in Form -I. For instance, Title - 50 words, Justif ication – 200 words, Work elements to be illustrated 
by Bar/PERT charts only, and novelty component - not more than 100 words. Objectives of the 
projects should not be more than 04 or 05.  
 Project proposal should  be submitted online.  
 How the project could be beneficial to the coal industry . 
 Name of Project Leader (s) and Project Coordinator (s) with complete communication details 
including e -mail & mobile No.  267310/2021/CCT1787 
6 
  Work plan should contain, how the proposed objective of the project ca n be achieved.  
 Proposed methodology to be carried out during execution of the project.  Methodology should 
contain the detailed activities in a certain time limit in Bar & P ERT chart indicating responsibility of 
participating agencies according to each activities.  
 Literature / web  survey bringing out clearly the recent development in the proposed field in two parts 
i.e. in the country and in other parts of the world.  
 R&D compone nts present in the project proposal. Specific research or development content which 
is exclusive to this proposal shall be clearly indicated.  
 Details of expertise available and work done in the proposed field by the institution/agency(s) 
concerned.  
 Details of infrastructure facilities available in the institution.  
 The past experience and performance of Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) in 
the execution of similar project vis -a-vis time schedule.  
 The track record for performance assess ment of Academic Institutes should be referring to the 
performance of respective PIs of the project  submitting  R&D project proposal for assessing ; whether 
the project s given earlier to them are being properly  implemented or are suffering from cost and 
time overrun.  
 In case of Private Research / Private Academic Institutions/ Organisations from India and abroad  
Credential of the institutes concern ed along with CVs of the persons involved in the project from 
that Institute should be given in the  project proposal.  Complete address along with the contact 
number s and e-mail ids of all persons involved in the project should be provided in the project 
proposal.  
 Collaborating agency should not be a vendor for the project and should contribute part of  research 
funding.  
 Requirement of funds with break -up under Capital and Revenue heads along with phases.  
 Certification from implementing agencies regarding the project has not been undertaken in the past, 
to avoid repetition of the project.  
 In case of multi institutional projects, the role and responsibility of each implementing agency should 
be clearly mentioned activity wise in the bar chart of the project proposal  (Form -I). 
 Major milestones during implementation  with percentage of fund req uirement . 
 The phasing of the fund requirement should be in line with the relevant milestones or activities.  
 In case of development of prototype/any new equipment which require field trial permission from 
DGMS, project proponent should discuss the matter in  advance during the formulation of proposal 
with concerned Director of DGMS and the advice given by DGMS should be strictly follow ed to 
avoid any delay in obtaining field trial permission from DGMS.  For field trial projects the DGMS may 267310/2021/CCT1788 
7 
 be kept in the conn ectivity link for ease of statutory concurrence during and on completion of the 
project . Documentation for discussion with DGMS may be incorporated in the project proposal.  
 To engage SC and ST candidates in research projects as per the norms of the government or at 
least one person each from SC and ST category in each project. Consent from implementing 
agencies in this regards should be incorporated in the project proposal  (As per the Office 
Memorandum No: 38011/2/2019 -IFD issued by Under Secretary t o Govt. of India (Finance), Ministry 
of Coal [MoC] on dated 28.01.2019 ). 
 Project outlay should be inclusive of all applicable taxes/duties/charges etc. with explicit break up 
of each taxes/duties/charges etc.  
6.0 COST  OF ITEMS WHICH CAN FORM PART OF PROJECT PR OPOSAL  
(i) Equipment, solely and exclusively required for the project work, if the same piece of equipment 
or a similar one is not already available with the Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing 
Agency(s) concerned.  
(ii) Permanent assets like land, buildings,  etc. are normally not funded from R&D fund. However, in 
special circumstances, such assets may be permitted to be created from R&D Fund. The item 
wise details and justification for each item is to be furnished.  
(iii) Manpower should normally be provided by the Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing 
Agency(s) concerned.  However, if considered essential, a minimum  number of scientific and 
technical personnel [Junior Research Fellows (JRFs), Senior Research Fellows (S RFs), 
Research Associates (RAs)] may be engaged for the project  for field trial/experimental purpose . 
It should not lead to employment beyond project duration.    
For projects requiring more number of JRFs/SRFs/RAs, complete and full justification for 
engag ement of JRFs/SRFs/RAs shall be provided in the project proposal.  
In any project implementation, additional Scientific/Technical manpower  may be employed on 
contractual basis and are co -terminus with the project . 
(iv) Maximum of Rs. 50,000/- for organizing,  attending seminars, workshop etc. for every  
implementing agency within the country.    
(v) Identified consumables  with proper justification .  
(vi) Contingency shall be limited to 5% of the total revenue cost of the project .   
(vii) TA/DA expenses in connection with tours undertaken in the interest of the project, subject to a 
ceiling of Rs. 3.0 lakh per institute or organization  per project . However, for projects requiring 
TA/DA amount in excess of Rs. 3.0 lakh per institute or organization  for the entire project duration , 
complete and detailed justification with calculations should  be provided in the project proposal  to 
facilitate concerned committees to appreciate and take a view in the matter.  
(viii) Engagement of the personnel durin g implementation of the project shall be the responsibility of 
the Principal Implementing or Sub -implementing Agency(s) as the case may be. The payment to 267310/2021/CCT1789 
8 
 be made to the engaged personnel for the desired duration of the project shall be within the 
relevant  norms/ Gui delines of the concerned Principal Implementing or Sub -implementing 
Agency(s).  
(ix) Project proposal should have signature of Project Leader (s) / Co-ordinator (s) in each page.  
(x) Institute o verhead may be charged as per provision elaborated in Para 4.1 4 under Annexure -I. 
7.0 ITEMS  NOT TO BE CONSIDERED UNDER S&T GRANT  
 
Following items are generally not considered for funding under any S&T projects unless it is specifically 
required for the nature of the project and approved by the concerned committee.   
(i) Infrastructural facilities like land, building, furniture and fittings, calculators, computers, etc,    
(ii) Salaries of permanent employees of the Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing agency(s) , 
except in case of institutions which do not have budget for s alary & wages like CMPDI.  
(iii) Honorarium to persons who are already in the employment of the institution,  
(iv) Foreign travel by Indian Implementing /sub -implementing agencies  
(v) Expenditure on account of engaging / inviting foreign experts during the project executio n 
beyond the provisions already indicated in the proposal  
(vi) Purchase of staff car  
(vii) Employment of peons, khalasis, laboratory attendants, stenographers, typists etc,  
(viii) Routine studies and operations.  
8.0 SUBMISSION OF PROJECT PROPOSAL  
(i) Project proposal should  be submitted in the online portal.  
(ii) Principal Implementing Agency(s) may submit S&T proposal to Nodal Agency a s specified in 
Form -I after  incorporating other relevant forms enclosed as Annexure.  
(iii) The proposals can be submitted any time during the year.  
(iv) For EoI proposal, it should be submitted within the specified time limit. 
(v) To speed up the process, the on -line project submission in the rolling mode looks imperative. 
For scrutinizing the projects received in the rolling mode, the cut -off dates could for pro ject 
submission may be fixed as 31stMarch, 30thJune, 30thSeptember and 31stDecember. The 
scrutiny, recommendation and approval of the projects received in each cycle must be done in 
the intervening period between consecutive cycles.  
The proponents  will be allowed to track the status of the submitted project proposal through 
online portal  267310/2021/CCT1790 
9 
 9.0 PROCEDURE FOR PROCESSING S&T PROJECT PROPOSAL   
Initial scrutiny of the project proposal will be made by the Central Mine Planning and Design Institute 
(CMPDI), which may interact, seek additional information, clarifications and if necessary call for /visit the 
institute for first hand discussions with the project leader/coordinator concerned . While scrutinizing, the 
nodal agency may seek the views of the internal and exter nal experts on the proposal . After 1st level 
scrutiny, Nodal agency will send the Soft  copies of all project proposal  with comments of the experts , to 
all the members of the Technical Sub -Committee of SSRC before  projects are deliberated in the meeting 
of Technical sub -committee of SSRC.  The Technical Sub -committee of SSRC  will evaluate the project 
proposals and if necessary, may call for clarifications/modifications.  
The project proposals which are found feasible and benefici al to Coal industry , the Technical Sub -
committee of SSRC  will recommend it for consideration and approval of SSRC . If the project proposal 
are found not feasible and /or beneficial to Coal industry, Technical Sub -committee of SSRC may reject 
the proposal for funding under S&T Grant of MoC.  Decision of Technical Sub -committee of SSRC 
regarding recommendation/rejection of project proposal shall be treated as final.  
The SSRC may approve the project proposal as recommended by Technical Sub -committee of SSRC, 
after detailed deliberation. Decision of SSRC regarding approval/rejection of project proposal shall be 
treated as final.  
10.0 EVALUATION OF S&T PROJECT  PROPOSAL  
The following shall be specifically looked into while carrying out technical evaluation of the propo sal: 
 The project proposal falls within thrust areas of research projects of MoC . 
 Past track record and expertise available with the agency concerned for carrying out the research 
work.  
 Progressive R&D input vis -à-vis earlier projects undertaken and similar  R&D work carried out within 
the country  and abroad.  
 The objectives to be  clear and well defined.  
 Details work programme  with time frame of each activity spelt out.    
 Realistic time frame for purchase of equipment and recruitment of manpower.  
 Cost provisi ons  
 Benefits to be accrued to the industry  through the proposed research work.  
11.0 DATE OF COMMENCEMENT OF PROJECT  
Once the project is approved by the SSRC , a formal approval letter  would be issued by MoC  and the 
date of commencement of project, preferably, would be considered as 1st day of the next calendar month , 
which will be communicated to the project proponent by CMPDI  through sanction letter . The zero date of 
commencement of the project will be considered from this date . 267310/2021/CCT1791 
10 
 If required, on request , the date of receipt of funds by the implementing agency may be considered as 
date of project  commencement instead of commencement date of as mentioned in sanction letter, when 
there is perceptible lag between  these two events.  Decision of Technical Sub -committ ee of SSRC 
regarding project commencement date shall be treated as final.  
12.0 DISBURSEMENT OF FUND TO PROJECTS  
Fund  shall only be disbursed to the Principal implementing agency. All the sub -implementing agenc ies 
shall requisite fund through Principal implement ing agency and funds will be disbursed to sub -
implementing agencies through Principal implementing agency  except CMPDI  & subsidiaries of CIL . 
However, if any Private institute/organization carrying out the project along with subsidiaries of 
CIL/SCCL/NLCIL,  funds will be disbursed to subsidiaries of CIL/SCCL/NLCIL for further disbursement.  
After approval of the project, the first installment of fund will be disbursed at one go by CMPDI within one 
months of the receipt of the request in the prescribed form (F orm-II). Request from the Principle 
Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) for disbursement of subsequent ins tallment of fund  for on -
going projects should also be submitted two months in advance along with the details of expenditure 
already incurred and  status of the progress of the project vis -à-vis approved work programme, in Forms 
–III, IV and V , indicating how much fund is lying idle in their account which is liable  for payment of interest.  
Specific approval for any deviation regarding fund requirem ent / disbursement shall have to be obtained 
by the Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) separately from the respective Competent 
Authority.  
Private institute/organization  who are  carrying out the project alongwith any Govt. Institute/organi sation 
shall submit fund r equisition through the Institute/organisation concerned  and it will be disbursed  to 
Private Research / Private Academic institutions/ organisations through concerned Institute/organisation 
and/or any subsidiary  of CIL, based on the progress of the project and as per their agreement with the 
Private Research / Private Academic institutions/ organisations. In exceptional case, Technical sub -
committee may instruct activity wise disburse ment of  fund to Private Resea rch / Private Academic 
institutions/ organisations directl y. 
Expenditure of fund  for implementing the project activities will be allowed for the project duration only.  
If presentation and acceptance of the completed project would not be done within the app roved time 
schedule of the project, Project proponent may separately indicate the expenditure for presentation, 
within the approved project outlay (subject to celling of Travel limit) and get reimbursement  of the same 
accordingly. Decision of the concerned  committee regarding the above expenditure shall be treated as 
final.  
13.0 MONITORING OF S&T PROJECTS  
 Physical and financial status of all on -going S&T projects is to be monitored by CMPDI on regular 
basis. Representatives of CMPDI may visi t the sites/locale of  project  to assess the actual progress 
of the project and to provide necessary guidance/instructions to complete the project within 
approved time frame.  267310/2021/CCT1792 
11 
  Quarterly Progress Reports and expenditure statements of the ongoing projects for the quarter 
ending Ma rch, June, September & December, shall be submitted by Principal Implementing / Sub -
implementing Agency(s) in the prescribed forms (Form III, IV&V) to CMPDI so as to reach by 15th 
of the month following close of the quarter and will be scrutinized by CMPDI.   
 Progress reports (both physical and financial) as received from Principal Implementing / Sub -
implementing Agency(s) on quarterly basis are to be reviewed by CMPDI. The causes of delay, if 
any, are to be discussed  & analyzed  in detail and remedial measures may be suggested.  
 The P rincipal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency shall submit a consolidated / interim report 
of progress made against the objectives and approved work programme at least once in 12 months 
to CMPDI in five (05) hard copies  together with soft copy . 
 Progress of S&T projects funded by MoC are to be reviewed  by the Technical Sub -committee of 
SSRC  and also by the SSRC . 
14.0 PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT  
 Three  hard copies  and soft copy of the Draft completion report will be sent t o General Manager (S& T), 
CMPDIL, preferably, two (2) months prior to date of completion of the project for in -depth scrutiny of 
the project findings. After incorporating the suggestions/modifications made by CMPDI or by the stake 
holders, the Principal Implementing / Sub -imple menting Agency(s) will submit 60 copies of the project 
completion report as per the details given in Form -VI along with a soft copy. The completion report 
shall be accompanied by Final Expenditure Statement in Form -III and Form -IV and duly authenticated 
by the Associated Finance of the Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency.  An audited 
expenditure statement/audited fund utilization certificate should be enclosed in the project completion 
report.  
 A certificate from General Manager of the area of th e CIL subsidiaries /SCCL/NLCIL , where the 
research work was carried out should also be furnished  stating their views on success of the project 
by the Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency.  
 The completion report shall include detailed  analysis related to quantified benefits  accrued on 
implementation of that S&T project.    
 After successful completion of the S&T projects, the Project Completion Reports will be placed for 
consideration and approval by the Technical Sub -committee of SSRC . 
 The project will be considered completed only after their acceptance by the Technical Sub -committee 
of SSRC .  
15.0 DISSEMINATION OF RESEARCH FINDINGS  
(i)  A copy of the project completion report as received from Implementing Agency(s) will be  provided to 
all subsidiar y companies of CIL , SCCL, NLCIL  to replicate the research findings and also to different  
research/academic institutes engaged in research in coal and allied industries to enable widespread 
use of the findings for the benefit of the industry.  267310/2021/CCT1793 
12 
 (ii) To intensi fy future research work and to identify need based research projects for coal sector, 
workshops/seminars /webinars  to be organized from time to time.  
(iii) The research findings of completed research projects may be  disseminated through  any leading 
journal or “Minetech” journal being published by CMPDI. The journal is required to be  widely circulated 
amongst the mining community.  
(iv) Abstract  of completed projects is to be uploaded in the website of CMPDI.  
(v) Ministry of Coal may issue directive to CIL, SCCL, NLCI L and others (to whom it may think suitable) 
for replication  of the outcome of the successful ly completed S&T projects . MoC  may also look after 
the business planning, commercialization, IP management, capital raising, profit sharing among the 
license, linkages with another organization etc.  
16.0 EXTENSION OF PROJECT DURATION  
The Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) shall immediately bring to the notice of the 
Nodal Agency, any slippage; along with corrective actions proposed to be taken up by the Principal 
Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) to minimize the slippage.  
Request for extension of project duration should be sent using Proforma (Form VII), preferably  two 
months prior to the date of expiry of the project in 3 copies, through the Head  of the Institution  / concerned 
authorized person .  
Approval for  time extension of project duration up to 3 months  may be accorded by the Chairman of the 
Technical Sub -committee of SSRC , to avoid delay in implementation of the project . 
Approval for extensi on of project duration up to 6 months beyond the original schedule may be accorded 
by the Technical Sub -committee of SSRC . 
Approval for extension of project duration beyond the original schedule may be accorded by the SSRC , 
if required . 
The Project Implementing Agencies are required to submit realistic timeline for project approval as well 
as for extension. Therefore, the extension of projects may be allowed not more than two times of 6 
months each.  However, in exceptional cases, project duration may  be extended beyond the time frame 
as mentioned above by the Technical Sub -committee of SSRC and/or  SSRC.  
17.0 RE-APPROPRIATION OF FUND/ REVISION OF COST OF PROJECT   
Proposal for revision of the overall approved cost of the project would not be entertained as a  matter of 
policy . In exceptional cases , request for revision of the project cost should be submitted by implementing 
agencies in Proforma  (Form VI II) in 3 copies, through the Head of the Institution  / concerned authorized 
person with detailed justificatio ns leading to cost escalation.  
Approval for Re-appropriation of funds from one item to another in the same head i.e. Capital to Capital 
and Revenue to Revenue  may be accorded by the Technical Sub -committee for SSRC  within the total 
approved cost.  In except ional cases, if the Technical Sub -committee for SSRC committee permits, Re-
appropriation of funds  may be allowed in different heads to avoid cost escalation of the project.  267310/2021/CCT1794 
13 
 The items for which re -appropriation is allowed, should not result in exceeding the laid down limits of 
expenditure on that particular item as agreed for re-appropriation for further  impleme ntation of  coal 
research projects. The overall ceiling on items su ch as travel, contingency, organizing / attending the 
seminars for symposia  etc. should not be exceeded  the laid down provisions in the guidelines for coal 
research projects . 
Approval of cost escalation for the projects may be accorded by SSRC  on recommend ation of the 
Technical Sub -committee of SSRC . 
Chairman of the Technical sub -committee of SSRC  is however, authorized to approve increase in cost 
solely due to variation in exchange rate and Govt. Tax (GST etc.), which should be subsequently ratified 
by SSRC. For this purpose implementing agency will be required to submit to CMPDI item wise details 
of imported equipment provided in the approved proposal  along with their value in foreign currency and 
equivalent Indian rupee, present value of each of these equipment in foreign currency, corresponding 
Indian rupee and prevailing rate of exchange , tax etc. Any approval of revision of the cost on this account 
should be communicated to Technical Sub -committee of SSRC and SSRC in its next meeting with 
required ca lculations and figures.  
To avoid delay in implementation of the project , one-time approval of  Re-appropriation of funds from one 
item to another in the same head i.e. Capital to Capital and Revenue to Revenue  may be accorded by 
the Chairman of the Technical sub -committee of SSRC  within the total approved cost.  
18.0 PUBLICATION OF RESEARCH PAPER  
To restrict publication of sensitive data during wide dissemination of research finding carried out under 
the S&T Grant of MoC , the Principal Implementing / Sub-implementing Agency(s) will require approval 
from Chairman of the Technical Sub -committee of SSRC  through Nodal Agency.  
Investigators may be  encouraged  to publish some of the research papers emerging out of the project 
work in leading and widely circulated  Indian /International  Journals  If the results of research are to be 
legally protected, the results should not be published without action being taken to secure legal protection 
for the research results.  
Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) desirous of publishing papers based on the 
research work done under S&T Grant  funding will duly acknowledge the receipt of grant from MoC  and 
shall provide the endorse d five (5) copies of the publication to the Nodal Agency  i.e. CMPDI .  
19.0  PATENT OR INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS (IPR)  
With a view to encourage the institutions to file patent applications on their innovations, to motivate them 
to commercialize  their technologies and to facilitate them to reward their inventers, the following 
instructions may be practiced as being  followed by DST.  
I. In these instructions:  
(a) “Institutions” means any technical, scientific or academic establishment where research work is 
carried out through fund ing by Ministry of Coal  267310/2021/CCT1795 
14 
 (b) “Intellectual Property Rights” include patents, registered designs, copyrights and layout design 
of integrated circuits.  
(c) “Inventor” means an employee of the institution whose duties involve carrying out of scientific or 
technical re search.  
II. Scope : These instructions apply to those institutions receiving funds for research projects from the 
Ministry of Coal.  
III. Sharing of IPR : Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) will be shared between MoC and the Implementing 
/ Sub -implementing Agency(s) in equal proportion (50:50) after successful completion and before 
commercialization of the product/ process developed. In case, there are more than one implementing 
Agenc ies, the proportion i.e. 50% of the IPR may be distributed among all implementing Age ncies in 
appropriate proportion. Director Technical (RD&T), CMPDI will be the inventor / proprietor  on behalf 
of MoC during filling of IPR . 
IV. Inventions by Institutions : Institutions shall be encouraged to seek protection of Intellectual 
Property Rights (IPR)  to the results of research through R&D projects. While the patent may be taken 
in the name(s) of inventor(s), the institution shall ensure that the patent is assigned to it. The institution 
shall get its name along with Director (T/RD&T), CMPDI entered in  the Register of Patents as the 
inventor/ proprietor of the patent. The institution shall take necessary step for commercial exploitation 
of the patent on exclusive/non -exclusive basis. The institution is permitted to retain the benefits and 
earnings arisin g out of the IPR  as per the agreed terms & conditions between IPR holder (mentioned 
in Sl. No. III) . However, the institution may determine the share of the inventor(s) and other person 
from such actual earnings  of the concerned institute/organisation . Such share (s) shall be limited to 
1/3rd of the actual earnings.  
V. Inventions by institutions and industrial concerns : IPR generated through joint research by 
institution(s) and industrial concern(s) through joint effort can be owned jointly by them as may b e 
mutually agreed to by them through a written agreement. However, MoC will retain 50% of its share. 
The institution and industrial concern may transfer the technology to a third party for 
commercialization on exclusive/non -exclusive basis  with consent fro m MoC . The third party, 
exclusively licensed to market the innovation in India must manufacture the product in India. The joint 
owners may share the benefits and earnings arising out of commercial exploitation of IPR. The 
institutions may determine the sha re of the invention(s) and other persons from such actual earnings. 
Such share(s) shall not exceed 1/3rd of the actual earnings.  
VI. While applying for the IPR, the Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) should clearly 
mention the name of the S&T project under which various processes / products were developed and 
the fact that funds for the development, for which patent is proposed to be taken were provided by 
Ministry of Coal (MoC). Implementing agency shall file patent application  with prior appr oval from the 
Chairman of the Technical Sub -committee of SSRC through Nodal Agency i.e. CMPDI.  
VII. Patent Facilitating Funds : The institution (s) shall set apart not less than 25 per cent of such earnings 
for crediting into a fund called Patent Facilitating Fun d. This Fund shall be utilized by the institution 267310/2021/CCT1796 
15 
 for updating the innovation, for filing new patent applications, protecting their rights against 
infringements, for creating awareness and building competency on IPR and related issues.  
VIII. Information : The ins titutions shall submit information relating to the details of the patent obtained, 
the benefits and earnings arising out of IPR and the turnover of the products periodically to the funding 
Agency (i.e. Department/Ministry) . 
IX. Royalty -free license : The Govern ment shall have a royalty -free license  for the use of the intellectual 
property for the purpose of the Government of India.  
X. Any instructions issued by  Central Government time to time regarding IPR shall be strictly followed . 
20.0 ASSETS ACQUIRED UNDER S&T GRANT  
(i) All assets acquired under the S&T Grant  shall be the property of MoC . 
(ii) The records of all assets procured / purchased under S&T Grant  shall be maintained by the 
Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) in a bound paged register in the 
prescribed  Proforma (Form -IV) as well as in their earmarked computing system.  
(iii) All assets acquired under the S&T Grant  shall not, without prior approval of Technical Sub -
committee of SSRC , be disposed off or encumbered or utilized or transfer to any other institute / 
organisation for the purpose other than specified.  
(iv) At the conclusion of the project, MoC  may decide whether to sell , retain in the 
institute/ organization  or otherwise dispose off the assets which are the property of MoC . 
 The list of all assets, including values , date of purchase and estimated life  should be 
provided by the Heads of the Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) to 
CMPDI along with their specific requests, if any, for disposal / retention  /transfer to any 
other institute, at the en d of the project . 
 List of equipment should also be placed in the website of the concerned institute  
indicating the project title under  which it was procured from the S&T Grant . 
 The request for disposal / retention as received from Principal Implementing / sub-
implementing Agency(s) will be placed for consideration and approval of the Technical 
Sub-committee of SSRC.  
 The decision of Technical Sub -committee of SSRC  will be communicated to the Principal 
Implementing / sub -implementing Agency(s).  
(v) The equipment / instrument procured for a specific purpose/application in a specialized set -up 
typically designed and constructed at the site of implementation may be allowed to be retain ed 
by the Principal Implementing / sub -implementing Agency(s) as thes e equipment might not be 
useful / utilized for other purpose.  
However, if any profit earned  after successful completion of the project utilizing the above 
equipment, it shall be intimated to CMPDI at the end of every financial year, with details of the 
place of implementation and benefits acquired . 267310/2021/CCT1797 
16 
 (vi) In case of transfer / shifting of assets to other places after successful completion of the project, 
the Principal Implementing / sub -implementing Agency(s) shall submit a proposal for cost of 
packing, transporta tion (including transit insurance), overhauling etc. to the Nodal Agency for 
consideration of the Technical Sub -committee of SSRC . 
(vii) After written communication from the Nodal Agency (CMPDI), with due approval of the 
Technical Sub -committee of SSRC , the equipment may be disposed off as per the rules and 
regulations followed by the organization/Institute concerned , with an intimation to CMPDI . 
Funds collected  (if any) during disposal of assets , to be subsequently credited to CMPDI 
account for credit to the  MoC.  
(viii) Any decision of Technical Sub -committee of SSRC  regarding retention/return/disposal /transfer  
of assets shall be treated as final.  
21.0 AUDIT OF ACCOUNTS  
It shall be the responsibility of Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) to get the accou nts 
pertaining to the S&T Grant  audited, regularly and furnish the copy of audited statement to CMPDI. The 
Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India at his discretion shall have the right of access to the 
books and accounts of the Principal Implementi ng / Sub -implementing Agency(s) for the fund received 
from MoC . In case of adverse remarks/audit para on the project being funded from this fund, the Principal 
Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) shall immediately bring such remarks para to the notic e of 
the Nodal Agency, along with their reply to such para remarks.   
22.0 INTEREST ON GRANT  
If a part or whole of the fund is kept in a bank account earning interest, the interest earned, if any, shall 
be reported to CMPDI. The interest thus earned will be trea ted as a credit to the institute to be adjusted 
towards further installments of fund under  the project  or to be subsequently credited to CMPDI account 
for credit to the MoC  on completion of the project . Fund received from CMPDI shall not be parked in bank  
account not earning interest.  
23.0 TERMINATION OF A PROJECT  
The SSRC  reserves the right to  terminate a project at any stage if it is convinced that the fund has not 
been properly utilized or appropriate progress is not being made or any other reason s, on the 
recommendation  of Technical Sub -committee of SSRC . There will be no financial penalty  in case of 
termination of any S&T project  if all the approved activities have been followed by the implementing 
agencies . 
SSRC is empowered to take any action against the Project Implementing Agency in case of failure to 
complete the project  due to negligence /lackadaisical approach , despite being given repeated extensions. 
This will discourage intentional or avoidable delay in execution of research Projects and submission o f 
unrealistic/ underestimated schedule for project completion. This may include (a) banning/black listing 
etc for certain period of time, (b) recovery of full or part of the disbursed fund if approved activities are 
not followed, (c) displaying the banning  list in the web portal etc.  
 267310/2021/CCT1798 
17 
 ANNEXURE – I 
GENERAL INFORMATION AND INSTRUCTIONS  
FOR PREPERATION OF RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS  
1.0 GENERAL .  
 
1.1 Before filling in the prescribed format for S&T project proposal, please read the GUIDELINES FOR 
FORMULATION, IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING OF COAL RESEARCH PROJECTS OF 
Ministry of Coal , carefully.   
1.2    The proposal should be prepared and submitted strictly according to the format prescribed in this  
document.  
1.3  Please also read explanatory notes and detailed instructions carefully for completing each section of 
the prescribed format while preparing the proposal.  
1.4  Initially proposal should be submitted online for scrutiny by CMPDI. If project p roposal is found suitable 
for further consideration, the Principal Implementing Agency(s) would be informed for submission of 
soft copy  through email , after incorporating suggestions/ additions / modifications, if any, to:  
 General Manager (S&T), CMPDI  
 Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Ltd.   
Gondwana Place , Kanke Road, Ranchi - 834 031.  
2.0 DOCUMENTS/ENCLOSURES REQUIRED WITH THE PROPOSAL  
(i)          Detailed project proposal for S&T Grant of MoC  (In Form -I) 
(ii) Endorsement from the Head of the I nstitution (on letter head in Form I A)  
(ii) In case of a multi institutional project, the formal agreement/ consent letter in Form -IA, between 
Principal Implementing Agency(s) and collaborating Sub -implementing Agency(s).  
(iii) Details of Equipment other than Compu ter Hardware / Software already procured during last seven 
years under S&T Grant of Ministry of Coal / R&D fund of CIL - which are related to the S&T / R&D 
Project ( In Form -IX) 
(v) Details of Computers, Software and accessories already procured during last th ree years under 
S&T Grant of Ministry of Coal / R&D fund of CIL - which are related to the S&T / R&D Project ( In 
Form -X) 
(vi) Details of manpower cost ( salary and wages) ( In Form -XI) 
(vii) Details of travel expenditure (TA/DA) ( In Form -XII) 
(viii) Supporting documents/ resolution of the academic institutes, University / Board / Governing Council 
for the salary/wages of Senior Research Fellows / Junior Research Fellows / Research Associates.  
(ix) Supporting documents of Overhead Cost required by academic institutes o r the Guidelines of 
concerned University / Board / Governing Council resolutions.  267310/2021/CCT1799 
18 
 3.0     IMPORTANT NOTES ON PROJECT FORMULATION  
(a) Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) shall confine their project to the specific 
aspects of a problem which can be studied in depth in the scheduled period and are of benefit to 
Coal industry. For identifying the specific aspects to be studied, the following should be 
considered:   
(b) After deciding on a broad topic of research, National and International status should be reviewed.   
(c) Identify the critical gap areas.   
(d) Identify the component of gap areas which can be studied in depth within the project scope & time 
frame and applied/used for the benefit of the industry.  
(e) Identify the institutions/experts who can contribute effectively to the project.   
(f) The proposal need not be limited to one agency rather an attempt should be made to pool the 
expertise available with various agencies.  
(g) Mission oriented multi agency, time targeted projects are preferred to projects limited to l aboratory 
investigations or findings which cannot find ready application for the benefit of the industry. The 
whole idea is that after completion of project, findings should bring tangible benefits to the industry.   
(h) While formulating the proposal, it shoul d be ensured that scientific and technical details are clearly 
spelt out, avoid generalities.   
(i) Proposals for Analysis/Study generally not to be considered as S&T Project. These type of 
proposals must include specific R&D component and outcome of which can be replicated in other 
areas/fields.  
4.0  INSTRUCTIONS FOR FILLING UP THE PROFORMA (FORM - I) 
 Please read additional instructions given in the following pages before filling the corresponding section 
of the format (Form –I). 
4.1 Definition of Problem   
 Please give precise technical statement of only those issues which the project is expected to cover 
within the scheduled duration.  
4.2    Objective s  
 Instead of an essay, it is suggested that objectives should be spelt out in a pointed language, keeping 
in view the subject area to be addressed.  
4.3      Justification for selecting the subject area  
 The importance of the project should be brought out in this section in the light of international and 
national state of knowledge on the subject and the benefits to the industry likely to be de rived due to 
successful completion of the project.  
  267310/2021/CCT1800 
19 
 4.4      Methodology  
 It is essential that, the experts in the selected subject area of researc h should get a clear understanding 
of research technique to be adopted. Further, the description should indicate precisely as to how the 
stated objectives will be achieved. Discuss various methods of approach in order of priority.  
4.5      Work Elements  
 Entire project activities are to be broken down to specific work elements in consonance with the 
objectives and methodology defined in earlier  section.  
4.6      Time Schedule  
 On the basis of work elements identified earlier, time schedule shall be drawn. Specific indications of 
milestones shall be identified. These milestones will help in periodic evaluation of the progress of the 
project and disbursement of fund. It is to be emphasized that the lead time for creation of infrastructural 
facilities needs to be indicated on realistic basis.  
4.7      Financial Outlay  
 All costs shall be expressed in Rupees ( INR) only. Foreign exchange, if required, for purchase of 
equipment or consumable, shall also be separately mentioned in terms of specified foreign currency 
and exchange rate adopted. Also include customs duty and other such charges, if applicable.  
Foreign Exchange c omponent in the Capital should be minimized.  
4.8      Outlay - Land and Building  
 Permanent assets like land, buildings, etc. are normally not funded from R&D fund.  However, in special 
circumstances, such assets may be permitted to be created from R&D Fund. The item wise details and 
justification for each item is to be furnished.  
4.9      Outlay – Equipment   
 List of all items of equipment with broad specification and quantity without make and model shall be 
provided. After the project is approved, the Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Ag ency(s) may 
go for upgraded version so long as the basic characteristics and costs are comparable to those 
mentioned in the proposal. Installation charges, inland transport, insurance etc., if required additionally, 
to be separately mentioned.  
4.10    Justification for Equipment   
 Justification for each item and number of equipment required (including its accessories, specific 
characteristics, resolution etc.) in relation to specific experiment / measurements / test contemplated 
in the project is to be provided. A certificate is to be enclosed by the Head of the Institute that equipment 
proposed to be procured for the experimental purpose is not readily available with the institute (Form 
1A). Duplication of the infrastructural facilities from S&T Grant  is not permitted. In case of a demand 
for import of equipment, furnish reasons as to why indigenous models, if available cannot be used.  
 
 267310/2021/CCT1801 
20 
 4.11    Outlay - Manpower  
Salary and wages of the permanent employees of the Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing 
Agency(s) are normally not admissible under S&T Grant . Though major scientific and technical work 
is to be carried out by the Project Leader/Coordinator and co -investigators, some additional scientific 
and technical personnel (JRFs/SRFs/RAs) may be engaged for working desired duration on the 
project. Engagement of the personnel for implementation of the project shall be the responsibility of 
the Principal Implement ing or Sub -implementing Agency(s) as the case may be. The payment to be 
made to the engaged personnel for the desired duration of the project shall be within the relevant 
norms/Guidelines of the concerned related Principal Implementing or Sub -implementing Agency(s).  
In case of engaging of technical personnel (JRFs/SRFs/RAs) in the research project, it is required to 
engage SC and ST candidates in research projects as per the norms of the Government or at least 
one person each from SC and ST category in each  project. This is as per the Office Memorandum 
dated 28.01.2019, issued by Under Secretary to the Govt. of India (Finance), MoC.  
4.12    Justification for Manpower  
 Justification for number and level of staff to be engaged and also the resolution of the institution 
regarding wages of the JRFs/SRFs/RAs.  
4.13    Outlay - Contingency  
 Special requirements not covered under normal heads for any projects , may be indicated under this 
section. Contingencies are meant to cover incidental expenditure and other miscellaneous expenditure 
likely to be incurred  during project implementation, due to increase in travel/ transport expenses / 
changes of TA/DA, salary revision of research associates, porter charges and additional expenses  
during preparation of project c ompletion report etc. This should  be limited to 5% of the total revenue 
cost of the project.  
4.14     Institute Overhead Cost  with Justification  
For meeting the cost of academic expense including infrastructural facilities , Institutional Overhead Cost 
for academic/research institutes  shall be within the provision mentioned as follows:  
a) For projects costing up to Rs: 1 .0 crore :Not more than 10% of the t otal cost for educational 
institutions and  8% for laboratories and institutions under Central Government 
Departments/Agencies  except CSIR laboratories ; 
b) For projects costing more than Rs. 1.0 crore and upto Rs.5.0 Cr. :Rs. 15.0 lakh o r 10% of Total 
project cost, whichever is less:  
c) For projects costing more than 5.0 Cr. and upto Rs. 20.0 Crore. Maximum Rs. 20.0 lakh will 
be provided as overheads ; and 
d) For projects costing more than Rs. 20.0 Crore : the quantum will be decided on a case to case 
basis and the dec ision of the approving committee will be treated as final.  
 
 267310/2021/CCT1802 
21 
 4.15    Time Schedule - Bar /Pert Chart  
 The proposal shall be supported by a BAR chart on time scale / PERT network showing duration of 
various work elements/activities. The activities should be broken down to sub activities/ sub sub -
activities to enable close and fruitful monitoring of the projects . In case of multi -institutional projects, 
role and responsibilities of all implementing agencies should be clearly mentioned against each 
activities . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  267310/2021/CCT1803 
22 
 ANNEXURE -II 
The following norms will be applicable to individual centric Extra Mural Research ( EMR ) projects (i.e proposals 
submitted by an individual researcher or a group of researchers students  etc.) funded by the Ministry of Coal , 
Government of India  
(i) Equipment:  
Full cost of equipment/s which is/are specifically recomme nded/approved by SSRC  be provided 
without discriminating the type of institutions (Public. Private. NGO etc.) . Ownership o f such equipment 
shall be MoC  and these shall not be disposed of without obtaining prior approval of the authority which 
sanctioned the gra nt-in-aid. At the end of the project a specific request be made by the grantee 
institution for re tention/transfer of these equipment to the Institute subject to the institute in ensuring 
proper upkeep of these equipment and making these available to the ot her researchers on 
recommendation of MoC.  A list of such equipment be placed in the website of the concerned institute  
(ii) Emoluments:  
The emoluments for manpower (other than JR F, SRF, RA and Research Scientist) to be fixed as per 
the norms framed by DST.  
(iii) Overheads:  
Towards meeting the cost of academic expenses including infrastructura l facilities, institute overhead 
may be charged as mentioned below : 
a) for projects costing upto  Rs 1 crore , 10% of the total cost for educational institutions and NGOs and 
8% fo r laboratories and institutions under Central Government Departments/Agencies;  
b) for projects costing more than Rs 1 .0 crore a nd upto  Rs. 5 .0 crore , overheads of Rs 15 .0 lakh or 
10% of total cost whichever is less,  
c) for projects costing more than 5.0 crore and upto  Rs 20 .0 crore , Rs 20.0 lakh will be provided as 
overheads, and  
d) for projects costing more than Rs. 20.0 crore. the quantum will be decided on a case to case basis  
(iv) Travel & Contingencies.  
Maximum of Rs. 50,000/ - each per annum may be provided for Tr avel and Contingencies . Higher 
amount, based on the recommendations of the Expert Committee, to be provided where the research 
work involves field work or/and project has many investigators / institutions and larger manpower. The 
contingency amount may als o be used fo r paying Regist ration fees for attending international 
conferences . 
(v) Consumables / Supplies & Materials:  
The amount may be fixed by SSRC based on the recommendations of the Technical Sub -committee 
of SSRC.  267310/2021/CCT1804 
23 
 (vi) Flexibility in Recurring budget:  
a) Though  different allocations are made under va rious heads in recurring budget such as 
manpower, consumables, contingency, travel, etc., the investigator has been given flexibility to 
use upto 10% funds sanctioned under each recurring heads (consumables, travel, contingency 
etc. but not manpower budget) . The PI will inform the Technical Sub -committee accordingly. The 
Technical Sub -committee in such cases will issue the revised sanction within the said limit of 10 
percent and within already approved overall recurri ng budget allocation . 
b) The Investigator will have the flexibility to appoint more or lesser number of staff and change the 
designation of manpower within  the sanctioned manpower budget  
(vii) Disbursement of fund  
Submission of fund requisition shall be through the  involved Institute/organisation Agency and it will be 
disbursed to Private Research / Private Academic institutions/ organisations through that 
Institute/organisation and/or any subsidiary of CIL . Fund disbursement shall be activity wise. On 
completion of  certain activities further fund will be disbursed  based on the progress of the project.  Cost 
of equipment shall be disbursed to the implementing agency in the first year at one go to avoid delay 
in implementation of the project.  
(viii) Extension of Projects  
Extension of project up  to six months can be granted by the Technical Sub -committee of SSRC , if it 
does not involve incr ease in the cost of the project. In other cases, approval are required from SSRC 
with recommendation of the Technical Sub -committee of SSRC.  
(ix) Transfer of PI from one Institute to another Institute  
The student submitting the projects should have at least term of the project period remaining in the 
Institute.  If the student passed out from the institute and leave the institute for any other assig nment, it 
is the responsibility of the project guide to find alternative student to complete the project within the 
approved project schedule.  
In exceptional cases, t he change of the host institute on account of PI moving from one host institute 
to another  host institute will be considered in MoC  subject to the present host institute giving its no 
objection certificate and the prospective institute agreeing to the terms and conditions of sanctioning 
of the grant . In such cases, the equipment etc . and the ba lance of funds will be transferred from the 
present institute to the proposed institute . 
 
 
 267310/2021/CCT1805 
24 
 FORM – I 
PROJECT PROPOSAL FOR S&T GRANT OF MoC  
1 PROJECT TITLE  :  
2 Name and address of principal Implementing Agency(s)  
Name of Project Leader/Coordinator/Principle 
Investigator  :  
3 Name and address of Sub -Implementing Agency(s)  
Name of Co -investigator(s)  :  
4 Definition of the issue  (Max. 300 words)  :  
5 Objectives  (Specific and not more than 2 -3) :  
6 Justification for subject area  (Max. 200 words)  :  
7 How the project is beneficial to coal industry    
8 Work Plan  (Max. 100 words)  :  
8.1 Methodology  (Max. 200 words)  :  
8.2 Organization of work elements  (Max. 200 words)  :  
8.3 Time schedule of activities giving Milestones (also 
include a Bar Chart/PERT Chart)  :  
9 Details of proposed outlay                                                                              (Rs.in lakhs)  
Sl. No.  Items   Total cost estimated  
   Total project 
cost  1st Year  2nd Year  3rd Year  
 Capital Expenditure       
9.1 Land & Building  :     
9.2 Equipment  :     
9.3 Total Capital (9.1+9.2) :     
 Revenue Expenditure       
9.4 Salaries / allowances  :     
9.5 Consumables  :     
9.6 Travel  :     
9.7 Attending or organizing Workshop/Seminar  :     
9.8 Total Revenue expenditure (9.4+9.5+9.6+9.7) :     
9.9 Contingency  :     
9.10 Institutional Overhead  :     
9.11 Applicable taxes/duties/charges etc.       
 
9.12 Grand  Total  
(9.3+ 9.8+9.9+9.10+9.11) : 
:     
Foreign Exchange Component:  
Name of the Foreign Currency:  
Exchange Rate:                               Date : 
  267310/2021/CCT1806 
25 
 10.0 Phasing of fund requirement ( in percentage) with respect to activities/milestone  
11.0 Outlay for land & Building:  
(Rs. in lakhs)  
Building:     
Sl. No.  Item Plinth Area  Type of Bldg.  Estimated Cost  
1.     
2.     
Total      
12.0 Justification for land & building:  
13.0 Outlay for Equipment:  
Generic Name of equipment and 
accessories with major 
specifications  Number  Imported/  
Indigenous  Estimated Cost   
(Rs.in lakhs)  Foreign Exchange 
Component  
1.      
2.      
3.      
Total       
 
Note: - 
(i)  Include GST, installation charges, inland transport, insurance etc.  
(ii) For the imported equipment, import duty concessions available for research/S&T/ Environment / Protection 
/ Ecology protection projectors will be availed of, wherever applicable.  
(iii) A Certificate to the effect that imported equipment is essential to the project and in the long run will save/not 
save foreign exchange.  
(iv)Please elaborate whether the imported equipment will help/not help, in indigenization of technology.  
14.0 Justification for Equipment:  
15.0 Outlay for consumable materials:  
Head  Particular  Outlay  
1st Yr. 2nd Yr. 3rd Yr. Total  
 Q     
 B     
 F     
 E     267310/2021/CCT1807 
26 
  Q     
 B     
 F     
 E     
 
Q - Quantity/Number  
B - Outlay in Rs. Lakhs  
F - FE Components  
E - Exchange rate adopted  
 
16.0 Curriculum – Vitae of Project Proponents, Viz. Principal Investigator/ Proj ect leader and Co -
investigator.  
 - Educational Qualifications.  
 - Past Experience in the field of research & industry  
 - Number of research projects handled  
 - Commercial application of research findings of other research projects handled by the 
investigator(s) in the past  
 - Papers published (India / Abroad) by the Investigators, etc.  
17.0 Past experience  
 Details of expertise available and work done in the proposed field by the institution/agency(s) 
concerned.  
 Details of infrastructure facilities available in the institution.  
 The past experience and performance of Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency(s) 
in the execution of similar project vis -a-vis time schedule.  
 The track record for performance assessment of Academic Institutes should be referring to the 
performance of respective PIs of the project  submitting R&D project p roposal for assessing; 
whether the projects given earlier to them are being properly  implemented or are suffering from 
cost and time overrun.  
18.0 Others  
 Discussions with DGMS, in case of projects requiring field trials in the mines .  
 Literature/ web surv ey bringing out clearly the recent development in the proposed field in two 
parts i.e. in the country and in other parts of the world.  
 R&D components present in the project proposal. Specific research or development content which 
is exclusive to this prop osal shall be clearly indicated.  
 267310/2021/CCT1808 
27 
  
 
FORM – IA 
ENDORSEMENT F ROM 
THE HEAD OF THE INSTITUTION  
(To be given on the letter head)  
 
Project Title : 
 
1. Certified that the Company/Institute intends to undertake above project with 
Dr/Sri/Smt…………………………………………… as a  Project Leader/Coordinator/Principal 
Investigator of the project.  
2. Certified that necessary infrastructure facilities shall be made available to Project Team. 
Accommodation, transport, manpower etc. will be provided at the project site to the research t eam for 
undertaking the field work.  
3. Certified that equipment proposed to be procured from the S&T Grant  are not readily available in the 
Company/Institute for the purpose.  
4. The company/Institute assumes to undertake the financial and other management responsibilities of 
the project.  
 
Name and signature           
of Head of the Company/Institution  
         (With seal)  
 
Date:  
Place:  
 
 
 
 
 267310/2021/CCT1809 
28 
 FUND REQUISITION                                                                                                 FORM -II 
Name of the project………………………………………………………………………….,  
Project Code:………………………………………………………………………………..  
Name of the Company/Institution……………………………………………………………  
Statement of fund requirement for the (year / period) ……………………………………                                                                                                     ( Rs. in lakhs)  
Items  Total 
approved 
Cost 
 Total Fund 
Received as 
on ……………  Interest 
Earned 
 
 Expenditure 
incurred till 
date 
 
 Balance fund 
available as on date 
…….  
 Fund provision 
in corresponding 
Year (As per 
sanction)  Fund Required for the 
……………… 
(year/period)  
 (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) = (2) + (3) – (4)   
A. Land & Building      
B. Capital equipment      
C. Manpower      
D. Consumables      
E. Travel      
F. Contingencies      
G. Attending/organizing  
workshop/seminar etc.      
Total  
 
   Fund received till date:   
Signature of Associate Finance Officer          Signature of Project Leader/Coordinator                                                                                                                             
Name……………………………….                                                              Name……………………… …………                      
Designation………………………                                                               Designation…………………………  
  Seal ………………………………           
Note: To be submitted in triplicate  267310/2021/CCT1810 
29 
 QUARTERLY EXPENDITURE STATEMENT                                                                    FORM -III 
 
Project Name ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  
Project Code: ………………………………….  
Name of Company/Institute - …………………………………..  
Statement of Expenditure for S&T Grant of MoC  
Expenditure statement for the  quarter ending …………...                                                                                           ( Rs. In lakhs)  
Items  Total 
approved 
cost*  Sanctioned 
provision in the 
Year………  Expenditure 
incurred up to 
Previous year  
 
 
(1) Total Expenditure  
up to previous 
quarter of the 
current financial 
year 
(2) Expenditure in 
the present 
quarter ending 
……………….  
 
(3) Progressive 
expenditure till the 
end of this quarter  
 
 
(4) =  (1)+(2)+(3)  
A. Land & Building  
B. Capital equipment  
C. Manpower  
D. Consumable  
E. TA/DA  
F. Contingencies  
G. Attending/organizing  
Seminar etc.  
H. Others        
Total        
*Details to be submitted as per sanction letter  
 
 Funds advanced till date……………………                                        Signature of Associate Finance Officer      Signature  of Project Leader/Coordinator                                                                                                                             
 Expenditure incurred till date ……            Name……………………………….               Name…………………………………  
 Unspent Balance in hand……………                        Designation………………………                  Designation…………………………   
        Seal ……………………… ………  
Note:  
(i) Expenditure under each specific heads should be limited to the amount funded by SSRC . Additional expenditure, if any, over and above the sanctioned 
provision is not admissible.  
(ii) To be submitted in triplicate  
        267310/2021/CCT1811 
30 
 FORM -IV 
 
QUARTERLY EXPENDITURE STATEMENT ON CAPITAL EQUIPMENT  
Project Name ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….  
Project Code :  
Name of Company/Institute …..  
Statement of Expenditure for S&T Grant of MoC …………………………… ………  
Details of Expenditure on capital equipment for the quarter ending ……………………..  
(Rs. In lakhs)  
Name of the 
equipment/*assets 
with make, model 
and major 
specifications  Name of the 
supplier  No. of units  
 
 
 
(1) Unit value  
 
 
 
(2) Total value  
 
 
 
(1) x (2)  Total 
Approved 
Cost 
 Progressive Capital 
expenditure from date 
of start of project till 
this quarter ending 
………………..  
    
    
*In case of land/buildings mention area and type of building.  
. 
Signature of Associate Finance Officer             Signature of Project Leader/Coordinator                                                                                                                             
Name ……………………………….                                  Name …………………………………                              
Designation ………………………                         Designation …………………………   
      Seal ……………………………..  
 
 
Note:  
(i) Expenditure under the specified  equipment should be limited to the  amount funded by SSRC . Additional expenditure, if any, 
over and above the sancti oned provision is not admissible.  
(ii) To be submitted in triplicate  
 
 267310/2021/CCT1812 
31 
 FORM –V 
QUARTERLY STATUS REPORT FOR S&T  PROJECT OF MoC  
 
1. Name of the Project with project code  
 :  
2. Progress for the Q/E  
 :  
3. Principal Implementing Agency(s)  
 :  
4. Sub-implementing  Agency(s)  : 
  
5. Project Co -ordinator /Leader  / Principle 
Investigator  :  
6. Date of commencement  
 :  
7. Approved date of completion  
 :  
8. Bar chart of activities as approved by SSRC  
including latest status of these activities in the 
same Bar chart (in different colour) to facilitate 
monitoring of progress of the project  :  
9. Details of work done during the quarter  :  
 
 
10. Slippage, if any, and reasons thereof  (Tentative 
date of completion, activity -wise to be submitted  
herewith ) :  
 
11. Corrective actions taken and to be taken to 
overcome slippage.  :  
12. Work expected to be done in next Quarter  :  
13. Quarterly expenditure statements in Forms -III & 
IV :  
Note:  Quarterly progress reports should be submitted in triplicate by Principal Implementing  / Sub -implementing  
Agency(s) to General Manager (S&T), CMPDI so as to reach by 15th of the month following close of the quarter.  267310/2021/CCT1813 
32 
  
FORM – VI 
PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT  
1. Title of the project  
2. Project Code  
3. Date of commencement  
4. Approved date of completion (As approved originally)  
5. Actual date of completion  
6. Objectives as stated in the Proposal  
7. The work programme as proposed an d approved by SSRC  
8. Details of the work done during the project run indicating the areas actually 
covered and as proposed in the original work programme.  
9. The extent to which the objectives as outlined in the original project proposal have 
been fulfill ed. 
10. The reasons for not covering all the areas (if any) of the scope of the study.  
11. The need or otherwise to take up further studies in the areas not covered under 
this study.  
12. Conclusions and recommendations with quantification of benefits to th e industry.  
13. Scope of application of findings of the study in the coal industry.  
14.  Name of persons associated with project and type of expertise developed by them.  
15. The final expenditure statement in form III & IV and duly authenticated by 
associ ated finance of the company.  
N O T E:  
(i) Fifty (50) copies of report shall be submitted in bounded form along with a softcopy  
(ii)      The cover page amongst others shall mention “Funded under S&T Grant of MoC ” 
 
 
 267310/2021/CCT1814 
33 
  
FORM – VII  
 
EXTENSION OF PROJECT DURATION  
 
 
3 copies of the proposal to be sent through Head of the Institution to reach two 
months prior to the approved completion date.  
 
 
1.    Name of the project with project code  
 
2.    Name of the Principal Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency  
 
3.    Name of Project Leader/Coordinator/ Principle Investigator  
 
4.    Date of start of the project  
 
5.    Scheduled date of completion of the project  
 
6.    Approved objective(s)  
 
7.    Approved work programme alongwith schedule  
 
8.   Details of work done alongwith approved time schedule of work plan (Bar  
chart)  
 
9.  Revised Bar Chart / PERT Network of activities alongwith justification for 
indicated items of time schedule.  
 
10.   Time Extension proposed and reasons for seeking the extension  
 
11.   Total cost of the project and actual expenditure incurred (Form -III, IV & V).   
 
 
Signature of Project Leader                           Signature of Project Coordinator  
Name…………………………                         Name…………………………………..  
Design ation…………………                          Designation……………………………  267310/2021/CCT1815 
34 
  
 FORM – VIII 
REVISION OF THE COST OF THE PROJECT/RE -APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS  
3 copies of the proposal to be sent through Head of the Institution to reach 2 
months prior to the date of requirement of additional funds/re -appropriation.  
1. Name of the project with project code  
2. Name of the Princip al Implementing / Sub -implementing Agency  
3. Name of project Leader/ Coordinator/ Principle Investigator  
4. Date o f start of the project  
5. Scheduled date of completion of the project  
6. Approved objective  
7. Approved work programme alongwith schedule  
8. Details of work done alongwith actual time schedule (Bar Chart)  
9. Total approved cost alongwith its break -up as p er Para 8 of Form -I 
10. Revised time schedule, if applicable.  
11. Actual expenditure till last quarter in Form – III & IV  
12. Revised cost of the project vis -à-vis the approved cost and reasons & 
justification for the revision / re -appropriation sought.  
Signature of Associate Finance Officer         Signature of Project Leader  
Name……………………………..                   Name…………………………………..  
Designation…………………………..             Designation……………………………  267310/2021/CCT1816 
35 
 FORM – IX  
 
Details of Equipment other than Comput er Hardware / Software already procured under S&T Scheme  of Ministry of 
Coal / R&D fund of CIL in the past - which are related to the below mentioned S&T project  
 
Name of the Project:                                                                                                               
 
Project Code:  
 
Principal Implementing Agency(s):  
 
Sub Implementing Agency(s):  
 
Sl.No  Details of 
Equipment  No. of 
Sets Make & 
Model  Year of 
Procurement  Name of the S&T/R&D Project 
against which procured  Status of 
equipment  Remark  
      
 
   
 
 
Note:  
 
(i) A list of all equipment procured for the last seven years from S&T/R&D Fund  giving the status and its present 
utilisation.  
(ii) The status should cover whether the equipment is in working condition or under breakdown. If under breakdown, 
can it be repaired & used in this research  project?  
(iii) In the light of the above please give detailed justification for procurement of additional equipment wh en such 
equipment  had been procured earlier under other S&T/R&D funding . 
(iv) This form should be signed by Project Leader and Project Coordinator and to be incorporated in the project 
proposal.  267310/2021/CCT1817 
36 
 FORM – X  
 
Details of Computers, Software and accessor ies already procured under S&T Scheme of Ministry of Coal / R&D fund 
of CIL in the past - which are related to the below mentioned S&T project  
 
Name of the Project:   
 
Project Code:  
 
Principal Implementing Agency(s):  
 
Sub Implementing Agency(s):  
 
Sl.No  Details of 
Computers/software  No. 
of 
Sets Make & 
Model  Year of 
Procurement  Name of the 
S&T/R&D Project 
against which 
procured  Present condition of the  
equipment/instrument  
 Remarks  
 
 
 
 
Note:  
 
(i) A list of all computer & accessories procured for the last three years from S&T/R&D Fund giving the status and its 
present utilisation.  
(ii) The status should cover whether the computer & accessories are in working condition or under breakdown. If under 
breakdown, can it be repaired & used in this research  project?  
(iii) In the light of the above please give detailed justification for procurement of additional equipment wh en such 
equipment  had been procured earlier under other S&T/R&D funding . 
(iv) This form should be signed by Project Leader and Project Coordinator a nd to be incorporated in the project 
proposal.  267310/2021/CCT1818 
37 
 FORM – XI  
 
DETAILS OF MANPOWER COST (SALARY AND WAGES)  
 
Name of the Project:                                                                                                                      
 
Project Code:  
 
Principal Implementing Agency(s):  
 
Sub Implementing Agency(s):  
 
Sl. 
No. Designation  No. 
of 
Persons  Total No. of 
months  
required/persons  Salary/month,  
InRs. Total salary  
(3 x 4 x 5), 
InRs. Year-wise phasing, In Rs. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 1st Yr. 2nd Yr. 3rd Yr. 
      
    
 
Note:  
 
 Engagement of the personnel (Research Associate/Research Assistant/Research Fellow/JRF/SRF) for implementation of 
the project shall be the responsibility of the Principal Implementing or Sub -implementing Agency(s) as the case may be. 
The payment to be made to the engaged personnel for the desired duration of the projec t shall be within the relevant 
Norms/Guidelines of the concerned related Principal Implementing or Sub -implementing Agency(s).  
 Salaries of permanent employees of the Principal Implement ing / S ub-implementing Agency(s) are not admissible   
 The form should be jointly signed by Project Leader/Coordinator and Associated Finance Officer of the Principal 
Implementing /Sub -implementing Agency(s) and to be incorporated in the project proposal.  
 
 267310/2021/CCT1819 
38 
 FORM – XII  
 
DETAILS OF TRAVEL EXPENDITURE (TA/DA)  
 
Name of the Project:                                                                                                     
 
Project Code:  
 
Principal Implementing Agency(s):  
 
Sub Implementing Agency(s):  
 
Designation  From  
(Place  
To 
Place)  Approx.  
Distance,  
In Km  Mode  Fare,  
 
InRs.. No. of  
Trips  Total travel  
Expenses  
(5 X 6),  
InRs. No. of days  
Involved for 
Daily  
Allowance 
(DA),  
InRs. Rate 
of DA 
per 
day, 
InRs. Total 
DA 
(8 x 9), 
InRs. Total 
TA+DA  
(7+10),  
InRs. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 
 
 
 
 
 
NB: 
 The form should be jointly signed by Project Leader/Coordinator and Associated Finance Officer of the Princip al 
Implementing Agency(s)/Sub -implementing Agency(s) and to be incorporated in the project proposal.  267310/2021/CCT1820 
39 
  
 
 
 
 
For further information/any clarification, please contact  
 
(i) Director Technical (RD&T), Central Mine Planning &  Design Institute Limited (A Subsidiary of 
Coal India Limited), Gondwana Place, Kanke Road, Ranchi – 834 031, Jharkhand, India;  
Phone: +91 651 2230010/2231850, Fax: +91 651 2233066/2231447/2230826  
email: dirrdt.cmpdi@coalindia.in  
 
(ii) General Manager (S &T), Central Mine Planning & Design Institute Limited (A Subsidiary of Coal 
India Limited), Gondwana Place, Kanke Road, Ranchi – 834 031, Jharkhand, India;  
Phone: +91 651 2231148 , Fax: +91 651 2231148  
email: gmsnt.cmpdi@coalindia.in  
 
            website: https://scienceandtech.cmpdi.co.in  
 
 
 
 
 267310/2021/CCT1821
